Add a new page on comparing Cypher and SQL (#298)
neo4j/docs-getting-started: modules/ROOT/pages/cypher-intro/cypher-sql.adoc

= Comparing Cypher with SQL
:tags: cypher, queries, graph-queries, sql-cypher, northwind-graph
:aura_signup: https://neo4j.com/cloud/aura/?ref=developer-guide
:description: This guide teaches anyone familiar with SQL how to write the equivalent, efficient Cypher statements. We'll use the well-known Northwind database to explain the concepts and work through the queries from simple to advanced.
:page-ad-overline-link: https://graphacademy.neo4j.com/?ref=guides
:page-ad-overline: Neo4j GraphAcademy
:page-ad-title: Cypher Fundamentals
:page-ad-description: Learn Cypher in this free, hands-on course
:page-ad-link: https://graphacademy.neo4j.com/?ref=guides
:page-ad-underline-role: button
:page-ad-underline: Learn more

== Introduction

> This guide shows anyone familiar with SQL how to write the equivalent Cypher queries.

Reviewer: not just write but also understand Cypher and translate their existing knowledge
mention that the guide builds up step by step?

> The Northwind database is used to illustrate how to translate SQL queries into Cypher, showcasing the similarities and differences between the two languages.

Reviewer: Mention that northwind is a long time relational database example dataset, that most people should be familiar with.

xref:cypher-intro/index.adoc[The previous page: Query a Neo4j database using Cypher] covers its basics.

> Before diving into the details, it is essential to understand that while both SQL and Cypher are declarative query languages, Cypher is specifically designed for querying graphs.

Reviewer: I would early point to the cypher-refcard so that people can have that open side-by-side

Unlike SQL, which deals with relational databases, Cypher is centered around expressing xref:cypher-intro/patterns.adoc[graph patterns].

> Graph pattern matching is the core technique in Cypher, enabling navigation, description, and data extraction from a graph by applying declarative patterns.

Reviewer: also creation

> Important concepts of Cypher include clauses, keywords, expressions, operators, and functions.

Reviewer: like in SQL, not sure if that's relevant as it's the same

Reviewer: we should call out the clauses, keywords, operators and functions that are different from SQL

* Clauses in Cypher form the structural elements of a query and define different parts of the query's logic.
For example, the `MATCH` clause is used to specify patterns to match in the graph, while the `WHERE` clause allows for filtering based on conditions.

> * Keywords in Cypher are reserved words that have specific meanings and functionalities within the Cypher query language.

Reviewer: Hmm not sure that's relevant for this section?

They are grouped by categories and provide essential commands and operations to manipulate and retrieve data from graph databases.
For more information, visit the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/syntax/reserved/[Cypher Manual -> Reserved keywords].

* Expressions in Cypher are important in formulating complex conditions, transforming values, and performing calculations within your queries.

> * In Cypher, operators are symbols or keywords used to perform operations on values and expressions.

Reviewer: same as SQL, I would probably skip this or mention that operators are very similar to SQL

Examples of operators include arithmetic operators, comparison operators, logical operators, and more.
They are fundamental for filtering data and performing calculations in queries.

* Cypher provides a set of built-in functions that can be used to manipulate data, perform computations, and transform values.
To list the available functions, run the command `SHOW FUNCTIONS`.

> Cypher allows you to chain multiple query parts together, enabling the composition of complex queries. 

Reviewer: mention that in cypher you can mix read- and write operations in the same statement, where the read-operation can provide the inputs for the writes or reads following after the write return relevant subsets to the caller

You can use Cypher to update the graph structure and data and even to ingest large amounts of CSV data.

> With xref:cypher-intro/procedures-functions.adoc[*user-defined procedures*], you can extend the language with functionality that you need but is not yet available.

Reviewer: use defined procedures and functions

> For more information about the Cypher query language, refer to the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/introduction/[Neo4j Cypher Manual^] and the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-cheat-sheet/5/[Cypher Cheat Sheet].

Reviewer 2: I agree with @jexp that there are areas in this section which are maybe not necessary (they seem to pertain more generally about Cypher, than to its differences with SQL, which is what this page is about).

[#cypher-sql-northwind]
== Northwind example model

The Northwind database represents the data storage of a retail application.
It contains customers, products, orders, employees, shippers, and categories as well as their interactions.

Relational databases store data in tables with fixed structure (schema), each column having a name, type, length, constraints, etc.
References between tables are represented by repeating the primary key of one table as a column in another as a foreign key.
For many-to-many references, JOIN-tables (or link-tables) are needed as an artificial construct between the connected tables.

> Graph databases store data in a graph with nodes and relationships between them (refer to xref:get-started-with-neo4j/graph-database.adoc#property-graph[] for more information about the graph format).

Reviewer: Each node is an instance of an entity (similar to a row in a table) the grouping of nodes into sets happens via labels.

> For a sensible relational model, the transformation into a graph is not hard, as rows of entity tables are converted into *nodes* and foreign-key relationships and JOIN-tables into *relationships*.

Reviewer: Nodes and relationships can hold arbitrary properties (key-value pairs) without the need for a fixed schema.

> It is recommended to familiarize yourself with the guides on xref:data-modeling/index.adoc[data modeling] and xref:data-import/index.adoc[data importing] into Neo4j.

Reviewer: perhaps move the call outs to the end of each section to not distract people?

[[graph-model]]
.Graph model
image::northwind_graph_workspace-arr.png[width=600]

[#cypher-sql-queries]
== Querying the data step by step

This guide intends to introduce Cypher by comparing it with the equivalent SQL statements.

You can run all the Cypher queries below using an {aura_signup}[AuraDB Free instance] and the Neo4j Workspace guide _Query fundamentals_.

. Load the Northwind dataset by following instructions in the guide.
+
.Guide _Query fundamentals_ in Neo4j Workspace
image::northwind_dataset_load.png[]
+
. After importing the data, run the command `call db.schema visualization` in Query to check the imported data vs the model.
Your output should be the following:
+
.Model of the Nortwind dataset in Workspace Query
image::northwind_schema_workspace.png[]

[TIP]
====
Graph data modeling is a flexible task.
You can create your own model of the Northwind dataset.
Use these link:https://github.com/neo4j-graph-examples/get-started/raw/main/data/northwind-full.zip[`.zip` files] and follow instructions in xref:appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl.adoc[the tutorial] on how to import data from a relational database into a graph database.
====

> [NOTE]

Reviewer: I would probably leave this off, it doesn't hurt to have a semicolon there. And you need them for multi-statements in browser/query.

====
The Cypher queries below end with the semi-colon `;`, which is a requirement in link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/tools/cypher-shell/[Cypher Shell] -- the command-line tool that comes with the Neo4j distribution.
In Neo4j Browser or Query in Workspace, you don't have to end Cypher queries with semi-colon.
====

=== Find all Products

_Select and Return Records_

> This is straightforward in SQL, just select everything from the `products` table.

Reviewer 2: I was under the impression that we should avoid making comments about the difficulty of tasks? I would probably just write something like: "To select and return records in SQL, select everything from the `products` table."

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.*
FROM products as p;
----

//sqltable

Similarly in Cypher, you *match* a simple pattern: all nodes with the *label* `:Product` and `RETURN` them.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
RETURN p;
----

//table

> _Field Access, Ordering and Paging_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Field access, ordering, and paging_
```

> It is more efficient to *return only a subset of attributes*, like `ProductName` and `UnitPrice`.

Reviewer 2: Does this need to be in bold?

You can also order by price and only return the 10 most expensive items.

[source, plsql]
----

> SELECT p.ProductName, p.UnitPrice

Reviewer 2: `ProductName` is capitalised for SQL not for Cypher (not sure if intentional and following a SQL convention - but if so, maybe worth calling out?)

FROM products as p
ORDER BY p.UnitPrice DESC
LIMIT 10;
----

//sqltable

> You can copy and paste the changes from SQL to Cypher.

Reviewer: Perhaps call out how similar the statements are except for the pattern matching part.

> But remember that labels, relationship types and property names are *case sensitive* in Neo4j.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But remember that labels, relationship types, and property names are *case sensitive* in Neo4j.
```

For more details on naming rules, see the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/syntax/naming/[Cypher Manual -> Naming rules and recommendations].

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
RETURN p.productName, p.unitPrice
ORDER BY p.unitPrice DESC
LIMIT 10;
----

// table

> === Find a single Product by Name

Reviewer 2: Product and Name should not be capitalised here, I think?
It could maybe be "Find a single `productName`" in reference to the property?

> _Filter by Equality_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Filter by equality_
```

> If you only want to look at a single Product, for example _Chocolade_, you can filter in SQL with the `WHERE` clause.

Reviewer: Mention that other common operators are supported, and call out regexp, STARTS WITH, CONTAINS, ENDS WITH?

> If you only want to look at a single Product, for example _Chocolade_, you can filter in SQL with the `WHERE` clause.

Reviewer 2: Should it be Chocolade (and not Chocolate)?
```suggestion
If you only want to look at a single product, for example, _Chocolade_, you can filter in SQL with the `WHERE` clause.
```

Author: It's Chocolade in the Northwind dataset, I checked

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.ProductName, p.UnitPrice
FROM products AS p
WHERE p.ProductName = 'Chocolade';
----

//sqltable

In Cypher, the `WHERE` clause belongs to the `MATCH` statement.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)

> WHERE p.productName = "Chocolade"

Reviewer: single quotes for strings (throughout) according to the cypher style guide

RETURN p.productName, p.unitPrice;
----

// table

> There is a shortcut in Cypher if you `MATCH` for a labeled node with a certain attribute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a shortcut in Cypher if you `MATCH` for a labeled node with a certain property attribute.
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product {productName:"Chocolade"})
RETURN p.productName, p.unitPrice;
----

_Indexing_

// table

> If you want to match quickly by this node label and attribute combination, it makes sense to create an index for that pair, if you haven't already done that during the xref:appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl.adoc[import].

Reviewer: Indexes in Cypher are only used for finding the starting points of a query, all subsequent pattern matching is done through the graph structure.
Cypher supports range, text, point, full-text and vector indexes.

> If you want to match quickly by this node label and attribute combination, it makes sense to create an index for that pair, if you haven't already done that during the xref:appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl.adoc[import].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to match quickly by a specific node label and attribute combination, it makes sense to create an index for that pair, if you haven't already done that during the xref:appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl.adoc[import].
```

For more details on how to create indexes, visit the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/indexes-for-search-performance/[Cypher manual -> Indexes for search performance].

[source, cypher]
----
CREATE INDEX FOR (p:Product) ON p.productName;
CREATE INDEX FOR (p:Product) ON p.unitPrice;
----

> === Filter Products

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Filter products
```

> _Filter by List/Range_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Filter by list/range_
```

You can also filter by multiple values in SQL.

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.ProductName, p.UnitPrice
FROM products as p
WHERE p.ProductName IN ('Chocolade','Chai');
----

//sqltable

> This can be done similarly in Cypher, which has full collection support, not just the `IN` operator but collection functions, predicates, and transformations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can also be achieved in Cypher, which has full collection support, including not only the `IN` operator but also collection functions, predicates, and transformations.
```
link to collection functions and predicates?

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
WHERE p.productName IN ['Chocolade','Chai']
RETURN p.productName, p.unitPrice;
----

// table

> _Filter by Multiple Numeric and Textual Predicates_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Filter by multiple numeric and textual predicates_
```

> Filtering can go further, and as an example, try to find some expensive products starting with "C".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Filtering can go further. 
For example, the below query tries to find expensive products starting with "C".
```

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.ProductName, p.UnitPrice
FROM products AS p
WHERE p.ProductName LIKE 'C%' AND p.UnitPrice > 100;
----

//sqltable

> In Cypher, the `LIKE` operator is replaced by the `STARTS WITH` (there are also `CONTAINS` and `ENDS WITH`) all three of which are index-supported:

Reviewer 2: Which "all three" are you referring to here? This is how I read the sentence:

```suggestion
In Cypher, the `LIKE` operator is replaced by the `STARTS WITH`, `CONTAINS`, and `ENDS WITH` operators (all three of which are index-supported):
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
WHERE p.productName STARTS WITH "C" AND p.unitPrice > 100
RETURN p.productName, p.unitPrice;
----

You can also use a regular expression, like `p.productName =~ "^C.*"`.

// table

> === Joining Products with Customers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Joining products with customers
```

_Join Records, Distinct Results_

If you want to see who bought _Chocolade_, you can join the four tables together.

> Refer to the <<relational-model, model>> (ER-diagram) if you don't recall what the model looks like.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Refer to the <<relational-model, model>> (ER-diagram) to recall what the model looks like.
```

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT DISTINCT c.CompanyName
FROM customers AS c
JOIN orders AS o ON (c.CustomerID = o.CustomerID)
JOIN order_details AS od ON (o.OrderID = od.OrderID)
JOIN products AS p ON (od.ProductID = p.ProductID)
WHERE p.ProductName = 'Chocolade';
----

//sqltable

The <<graph-model, graph model>> is much simpler, as there is no need to `JOIN` tables.
Expressing connections as graph patterns is easier to read too.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product {productName:"Chocolade"})<-[:ORDERS]-(:Order)<-[:PURCHASED]-(c:Customer)
RETURN DISTINCT c.companyName;
----

// table

> === New Customers without Orders yet

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== New customers without existing orders
```

_Outer Joins, Aggregation_

If you rephrase the question as "What have I bought and paid in total?", the `JOIN` stays the same; only the filter expression changes.
However, the situation is different if you have customers without any orders and still want to return them.
In that case, you have to use `OUTER JOINS` to make sure that results are returned even if there are no matching rows in other tables.

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.ProductName, sum(od.UnitPrice * od.Quantity) AS Volume
FROM customers AS c
LEFT OUTER JOIN orders AS o ON (c.CustomerID = o.CustomerID)
LEFT OUTER JOIN order_details AS od ON (o.OrderID = od.OrderID)
LEFT OUTER JOIN products AS p ON (od.ProductID = p.ProductID)
WHERE c.CompanyName = 'Drachenblut Delikatessen'
GROUP BY p.ProductName
ORDER BY Volume DESC;
----

//sqltable

> In your Cypher query, the `MATCH` between customer and order becomes an `OPTIONAL MATCH`, which is the equivalent of an `OUTER JOIN`.

Reviewer: Non existing nodes and relationships will then have a null value, which will result in attributes being null and not being aggregated by `sum`

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer {companyName:"Drachenblut Delikatessen"})
OPTIONAL MATCH (p:Product)<-[o:ORDERS]-(:Order)<-[:PURCHASED]-(c)

> RETURN p.productName, toInteger(sum(o.unitPrice * o.quantity)) AS volume

Reviewer: perhaps better use round(... , 2) ?

ORDER BY volume DESC;
----

// table

=== Top-selling Employees

_Aggregation, Grouping_

> In the previous query, a bit of aggregation was mentioned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The previous example mentioned aggregation.
```

By summing up product prices and ordered quantities, an aggregated view per product for the customer was provided.

You can use aggregation functions like `sum`, `count`, `avg`, `max` both in SQL and Cypher.
In SQL, aggregation is explicit so you have to provide all grouping keys again in the `GROUP BY` clause.
If you want to see the top-selling employees, run the following query:

[source, plsql]
----

> SELECT e.EmployeeID, count(*) AS Count

Reviewer: should also return e.first and lastname to be equivalent. Otherwise SQL devs can make the case that the join is not needed.

Author: I've rewritten the SQL query.

FROM Employee AS e
JOIN Order AS o ON (o.EmployeeID = e.EmployeeID)
GROUP BY e.EmployeeID
ORDER BY Count DESC LIMIT 10;
----

//sqltable

In Cypher grouping for aggregation is implicit.

> As soon as you use the first aggregation function, all non-aggregated columns automatically become grouping keys.

Reviewer: Also additional aggregation functions like `collect`, `percentileCont`, `stdDev` are available.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (:Order)<-[:SOLD]-(e:Employee)

> RETURN e.firstName, e.lastName, count(*) AS cnt

Reviewer: not sure if we want to use first name and last name as grouping keys,
more efficient would be (in the general case) as it doesn't need to read the properties until the very last moment (only for the data actually returned

```
MATCH (:Order)<-[:SOLD]-(e:Employee)
WITH e, count(*) as cnt
ORDER BY cnt DESC LIMIT 10
RETURN e.firstName, e.lastName, cnt
```

> ORDER BY cnt DESC LIMIT 10;

Reviewer: we could even simplify the statement to a super efficient:
```
MATCH (e:Employee)
RETURN e.firstName, e.lastName, count { (e)-[:SOLD]->() }  AS cnt
ORDER BY cnt DESC LIMIT 10
```

Author: I tested this query. Actually, it took more time to return results in this case. So I decided to select this version of the query:
`MATCH (:Order)<-[:SOLD]-(e:Employee)
WITH e, count(*) as cnt
ORDER BY cnt DESC LIMIT 10
RETURN e.firstName, e.lastName, cnt`

----

//table

> === Employee Territories

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Employee territories
```

You have one main entity (master, head, parent) and many dependent ones (detail, position, child).
Usually you either query it by joining both and returning the master data multiple times (once for each detail) or by only fetching the primary key of the master and then pulling all detail rows via that foreign key.

For instance, if you look at the employees per territory, then the territory information is returned for each employee.

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT e.LastName, et.Description
FROM Employee AS e
JOIN EmployeeTerritory AS et ON (et.EmployeeID = e.EmployeeID)
JOIN Territory AS t ON (et.TerritoryID = t.TerritoryID);
----

//sqltable

In Cypher, you can either return the structure like in SQL or use the `collect()` aggregation function, which aggregates values into a collection (list, array).
This way, only one row per parent, containing an inlined collection of child values, is returned.
This also works for nested values.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (t:Territory)<-[:IN_TERRITORY]-(e:Employee)
RETURN t.territoryDescription, collect(e.lastName);
----

//table

=== Product Categories

_Hierarchies and Trees, Variable Length Joins_

> If you have to express category-, territory- or organizational hierarchies in SQL, you model it usually with a self-join via a foreign key from child to parent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have to express category-, territory- or organizational hierarchies in SQL, it is usually modeled with a self-join via a foreign key from child to parent.
```

> Adding data is not problematic, as are single level queries (get all children for this parent).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding data is not problematic, and neither are single-level queries.
```

> As soon as you get into multi-level queries, the number of joins explodes, especially if your level depth not fixed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As soon as you get into multi-level queries, the number of joins drastically increases, especially if your level depth is not fixed.
```

Taking the example of the product categories, you have to decide upfront up to how many levels of categories you want to query.
Only three potential levels are shown here (which means 1+2+3 = 6 self-joins of the `ProductCategory` table).

// TODO check

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.ProductName
FROM Product AS p
JOIN ProductCategory pc ON (p.CategoryID = pc.CategoryID AND pc.CategoryName = "Dairy Products")

JOIN ProductCategory pc1 ON (p.CategoryID = pc1.CategoryID
JOIN ProductCategory pc2 ON (pc2.ParentID = pc2.CategoryID AND pc2.CategoryName = "Dairy Products")

JOIN ProductCategory pc3 ON (p.CategoryID = pc3.CategoryID
JOIN ProductCategory pc4 ON (pc3.ParentID = pc4.CategoryID)
JOIN ProductCategory pc5 ON (pc4.ParentID = pc5.CategoryID AND pc5.CategoryName = "Dairy Products")
;
----

//sqltable

> Cypher is able to express hierarchies of any depth just with the appropriate relationships.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cypher is able to express hierarchies of any depth using only the appropriate relationships.
```

:page-ad-overline-link: https://graphacademy.neo4j.com/?ref=guides
:page-ad-overline: Neo4j GraphAcademy
:page-ad-title: Cypher Fundamentals
:page-ad-description: Learn Cypher in this free, hands-on course
:page-ad-link: https://graphacademy.neo4j.com/?ref=guides
:page-ad-underline-role: button
:page-ad-underline: Learn more

== Introduction

This guide shows anyone familiar with SQL how to write the equivalent Cypher queries.
We will use the well-known Northwind database to illustrate how to translate SQL queries into Cypher, showcasing the similarities and differences between the two languages.

xref:cypher-intro/index.adoc[The previous page: Introduction to Cypher] covers its basics.

Before diving into the details, it is essential to understand that while both SQL and Cypher are declarative query languages, Cypher is specifically designed for querying graphs.
Unlike SQL, which deals with relational databases, Cypher is all about expressing xref:cypher-intro/patterns.adoc[graph patterns].
Graph pattern matching is the core technique in Cypher, enabling navigation, description, and data extraction from a graph by applying declarative patterns.

> Important concepts of Cypher include clauses, expressions, keywords, operators, and functions.

Author: done

Refer to the relational and graph models below when considering the data structures in the following queries.

[[relational-model]]
.Relational model
image::Northwind_diagram.jpg[]

[[graph-model]]
.Graph model
image::northwind_graph_workspace-arr.png[width=600]

[#cypher-sql-queries]
== Querying the data step by step

This guide intends to introduce Cypher by comparing it with the equivalent SQL statements so that your existing SQL knowledge allows you to understand it immediately.

You can run all the Cypher queries below using an {aura_signup}[AuraDB Free instance] and the Neo4j Workspace guide _Query fundamentals_.

Follow the instructions in the guide to load the Northwind dataset.

.Guide _Query fundamentals_ in Neo4j Workspace
image::northwind_dataset_load.png[]

After populating the database, run the command `call db.schema visualization` in Query to check if everything is correct.
Your output should be the following:

.Model of the Nortwind dataset in Workspace Query
image::northwind_schema_workspace.png[]

> [TIP]

Reviewer: I think you can leave this off.

====
Graph data modeling is a flexible task.
You can create your own model of the Northwind dataset.
Use these link:https://github.com/neo4j-graph-examples/get-started/raw/main/data/northwind-full.zip[`.zip` files] and follow instructions in xref:appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl.adoc[the tutorial] on how to import data from a relational database into a graph database.
====

[NOTE]
====

> Note Cypher queries below end with the semi-colon `;`. 
> It is a requirement in link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/tools/cypher-shell/[Cypher Shell] -- a command-line tool that comes with the Neo4j distribution.
> In Neo4j Browser or Query of Workspace, you don't have to end Cypher queries with the semi-colon.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Cypher queries below end with the semi-colon `;`., which is a requirement in link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/tools/cypher-shell/[Cypher Shell] -- the command-line tool that comes with the Neo4j distribution.
In Neo4j Browser or Query in Workspace, you don't have to end Cypher queries with semi-colon.
```

====

=== Find all Products

_Select and Return Records_

> Straightforward in SQL, just select everything from the `products` table.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is straightforward in SQL, just select everything from the `products` table.
```

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.*
FROM products as p;
----

//sqltable

Similarly in Cypher, you just *match* a simple pattern: all nodes with the *label* `:Product` and `RETURN` them.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
RETURN p;
----

//table

_Field Access, Ordering and Paging_

> *More efficient is to return only a subset of attributes*, like `ProductName` and `UnitPrice`.
> And while we're on it, let's also order by price and only return the 10 most expensive items.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is more efficient to *return only a subset of attributes*, like `ProductName` and `UnitPrice`.
You can also order by price and only return the 10 most expensive items.
```

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.ProductName, p.UnitPrice
FROM products as p
ORDER BY p.UnitPrice DESC
LIMIT 10;
----

//sqltable

You can copy and paste the changes from SQL to Cypher.
But remember that labels, relationship types and property names are *case sensitive* in Neo4j.

> For more details on naming rules, go to the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/syntax/naming/[Cypher Manual -> Naming rules and recommendations].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more details on naming rules, see the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/syntax/naming/[Cypher Manual -> Naming rules and recommendations].
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
RETURN p.productName, p.unitPrice
ORDER BY p.unitPrice DESC
LIMIT 10;
----

// table

=== Find a single Product by Name

_Filter by Equality_

> If we only want to look at a single Product, for instance delicious _Chocolade_, we filter in SQL with the `WHERE` clause.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you only want to look at a single Product, for example _Chocolade_, you can filter in SQL with the `WHERE` clause.
```

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.ProductName, p.UnitPrice
FROM products AS p
WHERE p.ProductName = 'Chocolade';
----

//sqltable

In Cypher, the `WHERE` clause belongs to the `MATCH` statement.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
WHERE p.productName = "Chocolade"
RETURN p.productName, p.unitPrice;
----

// table

There is a shortcut in Cypher if you `MATCH` for a labeled node with a certain attribute.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product {productName:"Chocolade"})
RETURN p.productName, p.unitPrice;
----

_Indexing_

// table

> If you want to match quickly by this node label and attribute combination, it makes sense to create an index for that pair. 
> If you haven't done that during the xref:appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl.adoc[import].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to match quickly by this node label and attribute combination, it makes sense to create an index for that pair, if you haven't already done that during the xref:appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl.adoc[import].
```

For more details on how to create indexes, visit the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/indexes-for-search-performance/[Cypher manual -> Indexes for search performance].

[source, cypher]
----

> CREATE INDEX FOR (p:Product) ON p.productName;

Author: Do we have to provide names for indexes?

Reviewer: we should: `Product_productName` and also use `IF NOT EXISTS`

CREATE INDEX FOR (p:Product) ON p.unitPrice;
----

=== Filter Products

_Filter by List/Range_

You can also filter by multiple values.

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.ProductName, p.UnitPrice
FROM products as p
WHERE p.ProductName IN ('Chocolade','Chai');
----

//sqltable

> Similiarly in Cypher which has full collection support, not just the `IN` operator but collection functions, predicates, and transformations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This can be done similarly in Cypher, which has full collection support, not just the `IN` operator but collection functions, predicates, and transformations.
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
WHERE p.productName IN ['Chocolade','Chai']
RETURN p.productName, p.unitPrice;
----

// table

_Filter by Multiple Numeric and Textual Predicates_

> Filtering can go further, let's try to find some expensive products starting with "C".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Filtering can go further, and as an example, try to find some expensive products starting with "C".
```

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.ProductName, p.UnitPrice
FROM products AS p
WHERE p.ProductName LIKE 'C%' AND p.UnitPrice > 100;
----

//sqltable

> In Cypher, the `LIKE` operator is replaced by the `STARTS WITH` (there are also `CONTAINS` and `ENDS WITH`) all three of which are index supported:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Cypher, the `LIKE` operator is replaced by the `STARTS WITH` (there are also `CONTAINS` and `ENDS WITH`) all three of which are index-supported:
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
WHERE p.productName STARTS WITH "C" AND p.unitPrice > 100
RETURN p.productName, p.unitPrice;
----

You can also use a regular expression, like `p.productName =~ "^C.*"`.

// table

=== Joining Products with Customers

_Join Records, Distinct Results_

> Say you want to see who bought _Chocolade_.
> Let's join the four tables together.
> Refer to the <<relational-model, model>> (ER-diagram) if you are unsure.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to see who bought _Chocolade_, you can join the four tables together.
Refer to the <<relational-model, model>> (ER-diagram) if you don't recall what the model looks like.
```

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT DISTINCT c.CompanyName
FROM customers AS c
JOIN orders AS o ON (c.CustomerID = o.CustomerID)
JOIN order_details AS od ON (o.OrderID = od.OrderID)
JOIN products AS p ON (od.ProductID = p.ProductID)
WHERE p.ProductName = 'Chocolade';
----

//sqltable

> The <<graph-model, graph model>> is much simpler, as we don't need `JOIN` tables, and expressing connections as graph patterns is easier to read too.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The <<graph-model, graph model>> is much simpler, as there is no need to `JOIN` tables.
Expressing connections as graph patterns is easier to read too.
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product {productName:"Chocolade"})<-[:ORDERS]-(:Order)<-[:PURCHASED]-(c:Customer)
RETURN DISTINCT c.companyName;
----

// table

=== New Customers without Orders yet

_Outer Joins, Aggregation_

> If we rephrase the question as "What have I bought and paid in total?", the `JOIN` stays the same; only the filter expression changes.
> However, the situation is different if we have customers without any orders and still want to return them.
> In that case, we have to use `OUTER JOINS` to make sure that results are returned even if there are no matching rows in other tables.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you rephrase the question as "What have I bought and paid in total?", the `JOIN` stays the same; only the filter expression changes.
However, the situation is different if you have customers without any orders and still want to return them.
In that case, you have to use `OUTER JOINS` to make sure that results are returned even if there are no matching rows in other tables.
```

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.ProductName, sum(od.UnitPrice * od.Quantity) AS Volume
FROM customers AS c
LEFT OUTER JOIN orders AS o ON (c.CustomerID = o.CustomerID)
LEFT OUTER JOIN order_details AS od ON (o.OrderID = od.OrderID)
LEFT OUTER JOIN products AS p ON (od.ProductID = p.ProductID)
WHERE c.CompanyName = 'Drachenblut Delikatessen'
GROUP BY p.ProductName
ORDER BY Volume DESC;
----

//sqltable

> In our Cypher query, the `MATCH` between customer and order becomes an `OPTIONAL MATCH`, which is the equivalent of an `OUTER JOIN`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In your Cypher query, the `MATCH` between customer and order becomes an `OPTIONAL MATCH`, which is the equivalent of an `OUTER JOIN`.
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer {companyName:"Drachenblut Delikatessen"})
OPTIONAL MATCH (p:Product)<-[o:ORDERS]-(:Order)<-[:PURCHASED]-(c)
RETURN p.productName, toInteger(sum(o.unitPrice * o.quantity)) AS volume
ORDER BY volume DESC;
----

// table

=== Top-selling Employees

_Aggregation, Grouping_

> In the previous query, we sneaked in a bit of aggregation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the previous query, a bit of aggregation was mentioned.
```

> By summing up product prices and ordered quantities, we provided an aggregated view per product for the customer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By summing up product prices and ordered quantities, an aggregated view per product for the customer was provided.
```

In SQL, aggregation is explicit so you have to provide all grouping keys again in the `GROUP BY` clause.
If you want to see the top-selling employees, run the following query:

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT e.EmployeeID, count(*) AS Count
FROM Employee AS e
JOIN Order AS o ON (o.EmployeeID = e.EmployeeID)
GROUP BY e.EmployeeID
ORDER BY Count DESC LIMIT 10;
----

//sqltable

In Cypher grouping for aggregation is implicit.
As soon as you use the first aggregation function, all non-aggregated columns automatically become grouping keys.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (:Order)<-[:SOLD]-(e:Employee)
RETURN e.firstName, e.lastName, count(*) AS cnt
ORDER BY cnt DESC LIMIT 10;
----

//table

=== Employee Territories

_Collecting Master-Detail Queries_

In SQL, one of the challenging scenarios is dealing with master-detail information.
You have one main entity (master, head, parent) and many dependent ones (detail, position, child).
Usually you either query it by joining both and returning the master data multiple times (once for each detail) or by only fetching the primary key of the master and then pulling all detail rows via that foreign key.

> For instance, if we look at the employees per territory, then the territory information is returned for each employee.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For instance, if you look at the employees per territory, then the territory information is returned for each employee.
```

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT e.LastName, et.Description
FROM Employee AS e
JOIN EmployeeTerritory AS et ON (et.EmployeeID = e.EmployeeID)
JOIN Territory AS t ON (et.TerritoryID = t.TerritoryID);
----

//sqltable

In Cypher, you can either return the structure like in SQL or use the `collect()` aggregation function, which aggregates values into a collection (list, array).

> So we only return one row per parent, containing an inlined collection of child values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This way, only one row per parent, containing an inlined collection of child values, is returned.
```

This also works for nested values.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (t:Territory)<-[:IN_TERRITORY]-(e:Employee)
RETURN t.territoryDescription, collect(e.lastName);
----

//table

=== Product Categories

_Hierarchies and Trees, Variable Length Joins_

If you have to express category-, territory- or organizational hierarchies in SQL, you model it usually with a self-join via a foreign key from child to parent.
Adding data is not problematic, as are single level queries (get all children for this parent).
As soon as you get into multi-level queries, the number of joins explodes, especially if your level depth not fixed.

> Taking the example of the product categories, we have to decide upfront up to how many levels of categories we want to query.
> We will tackle only three potential levels here (which means 1+2+3 = 6 self-joins of the `ProductCategory` table).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Taking the example of the product categories, you have to decide upfront up to how many levels of categories you want to query.
Only three potential levels are shown here (which means 1+2+3 = 6 self-joins of the `ProductCategory` table).
```

// TODO check

[source, plsql]
----
SELECT p.ProductName
FROM Product AS p
JOIN ProductCategory pc ON (p.CategoryID = pc.CategoryID AND pc.CategoryName = "Dairy Products")

JOIN ProductCategory pc1 ON (p.CategoryID = pc1.CategoryID
JOIN ProductCategory pc2 ON (pc2.ParentID = pc2.CategoryID AND pc2.CategoryName = "Dairy Products")

JOIN ProductCategory pc3 ON (p.CategoryID = pc3.CategoryID
JOIN ProductCategory pc4 ON (pc3.ParentID = pc4.CategoryID)
JOIN ProductCategory pc5 ON (pc4.ParentID = pc5.CategoryID AND pc5.CategoryName = "Dairy Products")
;
----

//sqltable

Cypher is able to express hierarchies of any depth just with the appropriate relationships.
Variable levels are represented by variable length paths, which are denoted by a star `*` after the relationship type and optional limits (`min..max`).

> [source, cypher]

Author: This query doesn't work in Cypher. We have to replace it. I tried to rewrite it but I don't know the following kind of relationship `[:PARENT*0...]` in Cypher.

Reviewer: it just had the wrong property-names, this one should work, please try

```MATCH (p:Product)-[:PART_OF]->(l:Category)-[:PARENT*0..]-(:Category {categoryName:"Dairy Products"})
RETURN p.productName;```

Reviewer 2: I think we should use the new quantified relationships syntax here? see https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/patterns/concepts/#quantified-relationships
